Hi, my name is Brian Caffo, and this is
the lecture on p-values in the statistical
inference Coursera class as part of
our data science specialization.
This class is co-taught with my
c-instructors, Jeff Leek and
Roger Peng, we're all in
the department of Bio statistics
at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School
of Public Health.
P-values are the most common measure
of statistical significance.
Basically, every statistical software
that performs a hypothesis test
outputs a p-value for you.
And, because they're so popular, and
because often they get misinterpreted,
they are quite controversial
among statisticians.
And, so what I give here
are some comments both in favor,
of and some papers and
commentaries against P-value.
In this class, we're not going to focus
too much on these controversies, but
instead are just going to focus on
how do you generate a P-value and
how do you correctly interpret it?
The basic idea of a P-value is to start
under the null hypothesis assume that
nothing is going on, and then calculate
the probability of obtaining evidence as
or more extreme than we actually obtained
under this null hypothesis basically,
how unusual is the result we got
if the null hypothesis is true.
So let's go through the approach
through maybe three simple steps, and
then we'll go through basic
calculations in the next set of slides.
So first of all you get the hypothetical
distribution of a data summary,
which we'll just call a statistic like
our test statistic from the T lecture and
figure out its distribution
when nothing is going on,
the so-called null distribution
option of the statistic.
Then we calculate the statistic with
the data that we actually have so, for
example we calculate our T statistic
we actually plug in the empirical mean,
subtract off the hypothesized mean and
divide by the standard error.
Then we calculate the probability
of obtaining a statistic as or
more extreme in other words, we compare
what we calculated to our hypothetical
distribution, and we see how extreme
it is, in toward the alternative.
So, if the P-value is small, what you're
saying is the probability of observing
a test statistic as extreme as we saw,
is low if the null hypothesis were true.
Okay, let's go over P-values with
a little bit more formality.
So, the P-value is the probability
under the null hypothesis of
obtaining evidence as or
more extreme than was actually obtained.
So, and, and, we're, usually we're talking
about evidence here in terms of the test
statistic, so it's the probability
of obtaining a test statistic as or
more extreme in favor of the alternative
than was actually obtained.
So, if your P-value is small,
then either the null hypothesis is true,
and you've observed something that is
highly supportive of the alternative
that was quite unlikely, or
the null hypothesis is false.
So let's go through an exam- a quick,
just numerical example.
So, we've covered the T statistic,
and simple T test so
imagine if you wanted to test mu equal to
mu knot versus mu greater than mu not, and
our T statistic work got to be
2.5 on 15 degrees of freedom.
What is the probability
of getting a T statistic
as large as 2.5 under this,
in this scenario?
Well, here we can calculate
it it's just pt, 2.5 in 15,
15 for the degrees of freedom,
we want lower.tail = false because we
want the probability of being larger
than 2.5, right, as or more extreme
in the direction of the alternative and
that works out to be about 1%.
So therefore, the probability of
seeing evidence as or more extreme.
Then actually obtained under
the null hypothesis is one 1%, so
either the null hypothesis is true,
and we've seen an exceptionally
large T statistic, or
the null hypothesis is false.
So, there's another way to think about
the P-value as the so-called attained
significance level, and
let's go through that really quickly.
So we're calling through way an example
where our test statistic was two, for
H not mu equal to 30
versus mu greater than 30.
So test statistics larger
than two are,I,m sorry test
statistics that are larger
are going to be more supportive
of the alternative where two
here is two standard, or
that our test statistic is two standard
errors above the hypothesized mean of 30.
Let's assume that our test statistic
is standard normal, distributed
rather than T distributed just to make
our discussion a little bit easier.
Now if we were to set alpha equal to .05.
We know that we would reject
because we know the point,
the rejection region, and the quantile
that we would reject for at .05.
So that, that area was 0.05 would be, the
quantile would be 1.645 since we know 2,
Since we know 2 lies above 1.645 we would,
we would reject.
Now imagine if instead of 0.05,
imagine if we did 0.04 then
we would have another line that was
a little bit closer than 1.645.
So what if we were to find the exact error
rate where the line fell exactly on 2?
Well that would simply be
calculating this probability
right here of 2 or larger, and that's
nothing other than the P-value we just did
that calculation that's the probability
of getting a test statistic as large or
larger than 2 under the null hypothesis.
So at any rate another way to think about
the P-value, is its the smallest value for
alpha for which you would still
reject the null hypothesis.
And so because of that they call it
the attained significance level.
And what this means is that
the P-value is an extremely convenient
test statistic to communicate to people,
because when you give it to them,
they can test it versus whatever
alpha level they would like.
Let's reiterate some of the points
we made on the previous slide.
So by reporting a P-value your reader,
or whoever you're giving the P-value to,
to interpret it,
can perform the hypothesis test at
whatever alpha level he or she chooses to.
The simple rule is, if the P-value
is less than the alpha level,
then you reject a null hypothesis.
If the P-value is greater than it,
then you fail to reject.
Now, we calculated our P-values for
one sided hypothesis test, T and Z test.
In order to get the two sided hypothesis
test, you have to account for
the evidence as or
more extreme too large or as or
more extreme to small negative so
because the equal
probability in either tail you'll
wind up doubling the P-value.
I would give a cautionary note that
the software automatically interprets for
most tests, automatically interprets the
two-sided test most of the time they'll
denote this as P-value for
a two-sided test.
But if they don't,
they're always calculating the P-value for
the two-sided test.
The other thing I would know is that if
you happen to take some more advanced
classes in statistics that cover things
like Chi-squared test, those P-values
are automatically, in a sense, two-sided
you would not have to double them.